.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\" 
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.TH "HYDROGEN" "1" "v0.9.0" "Cominu A. , Prokoudine A." ""
.SH "NAME"
hydrogen \- Modern Drum Machine
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B hydrogen
.RI [ options ] 
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This manual page briefly documents the
.B hydrogen
command.
.PP 
\fBhydrogen\fP is a drum machine that has numerous features 
and a modern graphical user interface based on QT 3. Hydrogen 
incorporates a sample\-based stereo audio engine, which can 
load sound samples in .wav, .au, .aiff and .flac formats.
.PP 
Hydrogen features a pattern\-based sequencer, unlimited number 
of patterns and ability to chain patterns into a song. There 
can be up to 64 ticks per pattern with induvidual level per 
event and variable pattern length there.
.PP 
You can create up to 32 instrument tracks and control their 
volume, mute, solo and pan.
.PP 
You can make use of layering ability in Hydrogen. If you have ever 
dealed with real acoustic drums, then you know that if you 
kick a drum harder or softer it won't sound just louder or 
quieter. It will also sound a bit different. This is where 
layers step onto the stage. A layer represents a definable 
range of a level you kick a drum \-\- so called velocity. You 
assign appropriate samples to each layer (up to 16) of an 
instrument and in pattern editor you define velocity for each 
kick. The instrument will sound then exactly like the real one. 
Which is the point.
.PP 
Your song can be bounced to a WAV track in a non\-realtime mode. 
This is quite convenient if you are low on CPU and/or RAM and 
you don't want to run any JACKified multitrack recorder in order 
just to capture Hydrogen's output.
.PP 
If your drum line sounds too fine and too precise, you can use 
unique human velocity, human time and swing functions. You can 
make people think you have hired a dumb drummer for your band, 
if you let those sliders go to the very top.
.PP 
Hydrogen has drivers for both OSS (also, emulated by ALSA) and 
audio server JACK plus assignable JACK ports. There also is 
ALSA MIDI input with assignable midi\-in channel (1..16, ALL) for 
you to record events for pattern editor from a MIDI keyboard. 
Hydrogen can be synced with other JACK capable applications via 
JACK Transport mechanism.
.PP 
One of the ways to arrange your song is to try a different 
instrument set which is called a drumkit. A drumkit is a archive 
file which contains all the samples for a pattern editor and 
some metadata like the order their appear in a pattern editor. 
You can easily create your own drumkits and share them with 
anyone. Currently the most recommendable file format for samples 
is FLAC, which provides lossless compression up to fair 35%.
.SH "OPTIONS"
This program follow the usual GNU command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`\-\-').
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the Info files.

.TP 
.B \-d, \-\-driver AUDIODRIVER
Use the selected audio driver (jack, oss). Choosing 'jack' will 
give you realtime processing and low latency, if JACK server is 
running with the same privilegies. Choosing 'oss' will give you 
usual sad perfomance.
.TP 
.B \-s, \-\-song FILE
Load a song (*.h2song) at startup. Hydrogen will open a song file 
you define.
.TP 
.B \-n, \-\-nosplash
Start without splash screen.
.TP 
.B \-V, \-\-verbose
Print a lot of details about what Hydrogen is actually doing. This 
is good for fancy testing, while for a gdb test you will need to 
compile Hydrogen with \fB\-\-enable\-debugging\-messages\fR option. 
If ever you want to.
.TP 
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version of program and quit. Use this option, if you are running 
a Linux distro that is not based on either RPM or DEB, so that there 
is no packages database to find out, what version of Hydrogen is 
currently installed in your system.
.TP 
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show this help message

You can read thorough documentation from within Hydrogen. 
Go to 'Help' menu and choose 'User manual' menu item.

.SH "EXAMPLES"
Here is just a short example of using command line for Hydrogen
.PP 
\fB$ hydrogen \-d jack \-N \-v \-s /home/alexandre/hydrogen_songs/oh_my.h2song\fR
.PP 
In this case Hydrogen will start as JACK client, without 
a splash screen, with debbugging info and it will load a 
song called \fIoh_my.h2song\fR from 
\fI/home/alexandre/hydrogen_songs/\fR directory.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Following manpages are of use: 
.br 
\fBhydrogenPlayer(1)\fR, \fBjackd(1)\fR, \fBjackstart(1)\fR
.PP 
You will find latest development news, docs and additional drumkits at
.br 
.I http://hydrogen.sourceforge.net
.PP 
Feel free to subscribe to a mailing list at 
.br 
.I http://sourceforge.net/projects/hydrogen
.br 
and take part in discussion of Hydrogen's development. 
The more you communicate, the sooner new features will 
be expected. Don't hesitate to give voice!
.SH "AUTHORS"
This manual page was written by
.br 
Alessandro Cominu <comix@users.sourceforge.net>
.br 
and updated by
.br 
Alexandre Prokoudine <avp@lrn.ru> 

